1. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;823:79-88. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-216-2_6.

Introduction to genomics.

Del Giacco L(1), Cattaneo C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Functional and Reproductive Biology, Department of Biology, 
University of Milan, Milan-MI, Italy. luca.delgiacco@unimi.it

The science of genomes: only within the past few decades have scientists 
progressed from the analysis of a single or a small number of genes at once to 
the investigation of thousands of genes, going from the study of the units of 
inheritance to the investigation of the whole genome of an organism. The science 
of the genomes, or "genomics," initially dedicated to the determination of DNA 
sequences (the nucleotide order on a given fragment of DNA), has promptly 
expanded toward a more functional level--studying the expression profiles and 
the roles of both genes and proteins. The aim of the chapter is to review some 
basic assumptions and definitions that are the fabric of genomics, and to 
elucidate key concepts and approaches on which genomics rely.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-216-2_6
PMID: 22081340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nat Rev Genet. 2020 Apr;21(4):243-254. doi: 10.1038/s41576-020-0210-7. Epub 2020 
Feb 7.

Pan-genomics in the human genome era.

Sherman RM(1)(2), Salzberg SL(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA. rsherman@jhu.edu.
(2)Center for Computational Biology, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. rsherman@jhu.edu.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Center for Computational Biology, Whiting School of Engineering, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Since the early days of the genome era, the scientific community has relied on a 
single 'reference' genome for each species, which is used as the basis for a 
wide range of genetic analyses, including studies of variation within and across 
species. As sequencing costs have dropped, thousands of new genomes have been 
sequenced, and scientists have come to realize that a single reference genome is 
inadequate for many purposes. By sampling a diverse set of individuals, one can 
begin to assemble a pan-genome: a collection of all the DNA sequences that occur 
in a species. Here we review efforts to create pan-genomes for a range of 
species, from bacteria to humans, and we further consider the computational 
methods that have been proposed in order to capture, interpret and compare 
pan-genome data. As scientists continue to survey and catalogue the genomic 
variation across human populations and begin to assemble a human pan-genome, 
these efforts will increase our power to connect variation to human diversity, 
disease and beyond.

DOI: 10.1038/s41576-020-0210-7
PMCID: PMC7752153
PMID: 32034321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


3. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1704:55-78. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7463-4_3.

Comparative Genomics for Prokaryotes.

Setubal JC(1), Almeida NF(2), Wattam AR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 
Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes 748, São Paulo, SP, 05508-000, Brazil. 
Setubal@iq.usp.br.
(2)School of Computing, Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, 
MS, Brazil.
(3)Biocomplexity Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Bacteria and archaea, collectively known as prokaryotes, have in general genomes 
that are much smaller than those of eukaryotes. As a result, thousands of these 
genomes have been sequenced. In prokaryotes, gene architecture lacks the 
intron-exon structure of eukaryotic genes (with an occasional exception). These 
two facts mean that there is an abundance of data for prokaryotic genomes, and 
that they are easier to study than the more complex eukaryotic genomes. In this 
chapter, we provide an overview of genome comparison tools that have been 
developed primarily (sometimes exclusively) for prokaryotic genomes. We cover 
methods that use only the DNA sequences, methods that use only the gene content, 
and methods that use both data types.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7463-4_3
PMID: 29277863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1910:555-589. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9074-0_18.

Ancestral Population Genomics.

Dutheil JY(1), Hobolth A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany. dutheil@evolbio.mpg.de.
(2)Bioinformatics Research Center (BiRC), Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Borrowing both from population genetics and phylogenetics, the field of 
population genomics emerged as full genomes of several closely related species 
were available. Providing we can properly model sequence evolution within 
populations undergoing speciation events, this resource enables us to estimate 
key population genetics parameters such as ancestral population sizes and split 
times. Furthermore we can enhance our understanding of the recombination process 
and investigate various selective forces. With the advent of resequencing 
technologies, genome-wide patterns of diversity in extant populations have now 
come to complement this picture, offering an increasing power to study more 
recent genetic history.We discuss the basic models of genomes in populations, 
including speciation models for closely related species. A major point in our 
discussion is that only a few complete genomes contain much information about 
the whole population. The reason being that recombination unlinks genomic 
regions, and therefore a few genomes contain many segments with distinct 
histories. The challenge of population genomics is to decode this mosaic of 
histories in order to infer scenarios of demography and selection. We survey 
modeling strategies for understanding genetic variation in ancestral populations 
and species. The underlying models build on the coalescent with recombination 
process and introduce further assumptions to scale the analyses to genomic data 
sets.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9074-0_18
PMID: 31278677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Trends Microbiol. 2021 Jul;29(7):582-592. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.005. Epub 
2021 Feb 1.

Evolution of Microbial Genomics: Conceptual Shifts over a Quarter Century.

Koonin EV(1), Makarova KS(2), Wolf YI(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. Electronic address: koonin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.
(2)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
Bethesda, MD 20894, USA.

Prokaryote genomics started in earnest in 1995, with the complete sequences of 
two small bacterial genomes, those of Haemophilus influenzae and Mycoplasma 
genitalium. During the next quarter century, the prokaryote genome database has 
been growing exponentially, with no saturation in sight. For most of these 25 
years, genome sequencing remained limited to cultivable microbes. Together with 
next-generation sequencing methods, advances in metagenomics and single-cell 
genomics have lifted this limitation, providing for an increasingly unbiased 
characterization of the global prokaryote diversity. Advances in computational 
genomics followed the progress of genome sequencing, even if occasionally 
lagging behind. Several major new branches of bacteria and archaea were 
discovered, including Asgard archaea, the apparent closest relatives of 
eukaryotes and expansive groups of bacteria and archaea with small genomes 
thought to be symbionts of other prokaryotes. Comparative analysis of numerous 
prokaryote genomes spanning a wide range of evolutionary distances changed the 
conceptual foundations of microbiology, supplanting the notion of species 
genomes with fixed gene sets with that of dynamic pangenomes and the notion of a 
single Tree of Life (ToL) with a statistical tree-like trend among individual 
gene trees. Strides were also made towards a theory and quantitative laws of 
prokaryote genome evolution.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2021.01.005
PMID: 33541841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.


6. Trends Plant Sci. 2020 Oct;25(10):1030-1040. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2020.04.016. 
Epub 2020 Jun 9.

Single-Cell Genomics and Epigenomics: Technologies and Applications in Plants.

Luo C(1), Fernie AR(2), Yan J(3).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology, Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant 
Physiology, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(3)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan 430070, China. Electronic address: yjianbing@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

The development of genomics and epigenomics has allowed rapid advances in our 
understanding of plant biology. However, conventional bulk analysis dilutes 
cell-specific information by providing only average information, thereby 
limiting the resolution of genomic and functional genomic studies. Recent 
advances in single-cell sequencing technology concerning genomics and 
epigenomics open new avenues to dissect cell heterogeneity in multiple 
biological processes. Recent applications of these approaches to plants have 
provided exciting insights into diverse biological questions. We highlight the 
methodologies underlying the current techniques of single-cell genomics and 
epigenomics before covering their recent applications, potential significance, 
and future perspectives in plant biology.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tplants.2020.04.016
PMID: 32532595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2021 Jun 17;72:411-435. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-arplant-080720-105454. Epub 2021 Apr 13.

Plant Pan-Genomics Comes of Age.

Lei L(1), Goltsman E(1), Goodstein D(1), Wu GA(1), Rokhsar DS(1)(2), Vogel 
JP(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)DOE Joint Genome Institute, Berkeley, California 94720, USA; email: 
JPVogel@lbl.gov.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA.
(3)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

A pan-genome is the nonredundant collection of genes and/or DNA sequences in a 
species. Numerous studies have shown that plant pan-genomes are typically much 
larger than the genome of any individual and that a sizable fraction of the 
genes in any individual are present in only some genomes. The construction and 
interpretation of plant pan-genomes are challenging due to the large size and 
repetitive content of plant genomes. Most pan-genomes are largely focused on 
nontransposable element protein coding genes because they are more easily 
analyzed and defined than noncoding and repetitive sequences. Nevertheless, 
noncoding and repetitive DNA play important roles in determining the phenotype 
and genome evolution. Fortunately, it is now feasible to make multiple 
high-quality genomes that can be used to construct high-resolution pan-genomes 
that capture all the variation. However, assembling, displaying, and interacting 
with such high-resolution pan-genomes will require the development of new tools.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-arplant-080720-105454
PMID: 33848428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Brief Bioinform. 2019 Jul 19;20(4):1063-1070. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbx117.

Microbial genome analysis: the COG approach.

Galperin MY, Kristensen DM, Makarova KS, Wolf YI, Koonin EV.

For the past 20 years, the Clusters of Orthologous Genes (COG) database had been 
a popular tool for microbial genome annotation and comparative genomics. 
Initially created for the purpose of evolutionary classification of protein 
families, the COG have been used, apart from straightforward functional 
annotation of sequenced genomes, for such tasks as (i) unification of genome 
annotation in groups of related organisms; (ii) identification of missing and/or 
undetected genes in complete microbial genomes; (iii) analysis of genomic 
neighborhoods, in many cases allowing prediction of novel functional systems; 
(iv) analysis of metabolic pathways and prediction of alternative forms of 
enzymes; (v) comparison of organisms by COG functional categories; and (vi) 
prioritization of targets for structural and functional characterization. Here 
we review the principles of the COG approach and discuss its key advantages and 
drawbacks in microbial genome analysis.

Published by Oxford University Press 2017. This work is written by US Government 
employees and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbx117
PMCID: PMC6781585
PMID: 28968633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Brief Bioinform. 2018 Jan 1;19(1):118-135. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbw089.

Computational pan-genomics: status, promises and challenges.

Computational Pan-Genomics Consortium.

Collaborators: Marschall T, Marz M, Abeel T, Dijkstra L, Dutilh BE, Ghaffaari A, 
Kersey P, Kloosterman WP, Mäkinen V, Novak AM, Paten B, Porubsky D, Rivals E, 
Alkan C, Baaijens JA, De Bakker PIW, Boeva V, Bonnal RJP, Chiaromonte F, Chikhi 
R, Ciccarelli FD, Cijvat R, Datema E, Van Duijn CM, Eichler EE, Ernst C, Eskin 
E, Garrison E, El-Kebir M, Klau GW, Korbel JO, Lameijer EW, Langmead B, Martin 
M, Medvedev P, Mu JC, Neerincx P, Ouwens K, Peterlongo P, Pisanti N, Rahmann S, 
Raphael B, Reinert K, de Ridder D, de Ridder J, Schlesner M, Schulz-Trieglaff O, 
Sanders AD, Sheikhizadeh S, Shneider C, Smit S, Valenzuela D, Wang J, Wessels L, 
Zhang Y, Guryev V, Vandin F, Ye K, Schönhuth A.

Many disciplines, from human genetics and oncology to plant breeding, 
microbiology and virology, commonly face the challenge of analyzing rapidly 
increasing numbers of genomes. In case of Homo sapiens, the number of sequenced 
genomes will approach hundreds of thousands in the next few years. Simply 
scaling up established bioinformatics pipelines will not be sufficient for 
leveraging the full potential of such rich genomic data sets. Instead, novel, 
qualitatively different computational methods and paradigms are needed. We will 
witness the rapid extension of computational pan-genomics, a new sub-area of 
research in computational biology. In this article, we generalize existing 
definitions and understand a pan-genome as any collection of genomic sequences 
to be analyzed jointly or to be used as a reference. We examine already 
available approaches to construct and use pan-genomes, discuss the potential 
benefits of future technologies and methodologies and review open challenges 
from the vantage point of the above-mentioned biological disciplines. As a 
prominent example for a computational paradigm shift, we particularly highlight 
the transition from the representation of reference genomes as strings to 
representations as graphs. We outline how this and other challenges from 
different application domains translate into common computational problems, 
point out relevant bioinformatics techniques and identify open problems in 
computer science. With this review, we aim to increase awareness that a joint 
approach to computational pan-genomics can help address many of the problems 
currently faced in various domains.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbw089
PMCID: PMC5862344
PMID: 27769991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2012 Oct;23(5):659-65. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2012.01.014. 
Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Synthetic genomics: potential and limitations.

Montague MG(1), Lartigue C, Vashee S.

Author information:
(1)J. Craig Venter Institute, 9704 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, 
United States.

Technologies to synthetically assemble chromosome sized fragments of DNA as well 
as to enable making thousands of simultaneous changes to existing genomes are 
now available. These capacities are collectively termed synthetic genomics. The 
implications of synthetic genomics extend beyond the limited pathway and gene 
engineering of the past to include the engineering or whole metabolisms, 
regulatory networks, and even ecosystems. However, in order for those potentials 
to be met, certain limitations and barriers must be overcome. These barriers no 
longer include DNA modification and assembly, but instead are based in the 
limited organisms that many synthetic genomics methods function in, and the 
limited software for designing custom genomic sequences.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2012.01.014
PMID: 22342755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]